Fougeres lowered his head like a sheep when it rains. Then he asked and
obtained certain useful advice, and retouched his pictures before taking
them to Elie Magus. Elie paid him twenty-five francs apiece. At that
price of course Fougeres earned nothing; neither did he lose, thanks to
his sober living. He made a few excursions to the boulevard to see what
became of his pictures, and there he underwent a singular hallucination.
His neat, clean paintings, hard as tin and shiny as porcelain, were
covered with a sort of mist; they looked like old daubs. Magus was out,
and Pierre could obtain no information on this phenomenon. He fancied
something was wrong with his eyes.

The painter went back to his studio and made more pictures. After seven
years of continued toil Fougeres managed to compose and execute quite
passable work. He did as well as any artist of the second class.
Elie bought and sold all the paintings of the poor Breton, who earned
laboriously about two thousand francs a year while he spent but twelve
hundred.

At the Exhibition of 1829, Leon de Lora, Schinner, and Bridau, who all
three occupied a great position and were, in fact, at the head of the
art movement, were filled with pity for the perseverance and the poverty
of their old friend; and they caused to be admitted into the grand salon
of the Exhibition, a picture by Fougeres. This picture, powerful in
interest but derived from Vigneron as to sentiment and from Dubufe's
first manner as to execution, represented a young man in prison, whose
hair was being cut around the nape of the neck. On one side was
a priest, on the other two women, one old, one young, in tears. A
sheriff's clerk was reading aloud a document. On a wretched table was a
meal, untouched. The light came in through the bars of a window near
the ceiling. It was a picture fit to make the bourgeois shudder, and
the bourgeois shuddered. Fougeres had simply been inspired by the
masterpiece of Gerard Douw; he had turned the group of the "Dropsical
Woman" toward the window, instead of presenting it full front. The
condemned man was substituted for the dying woman--same pallor, same
glance, same appeal to God. Instead of the Dutch doctor, he had painted
the cold, official figure of the sheriff's clerk attired in black; but
he had added an old woman to the young one of Gerard Douw. The cruelly
simple and good-humored face of the executioner completed and dominated
the group. This plagiarism, very cleverly disguised, was not discovered.
The catalogue contained the following:--

     510. Grassou de Fougeres (Pierre), rue de Navarin, 2.
     Death-toilet of a Chouan, condemned to execution in 1809.

Though wholly second-rate, the picture had immense success, for it
recalled the affair of the "chauffeurs," of Mortagne. A crowd collected
every day before the now fashionable canvas; even Charles X. paused to
look at it. "Madame," being told of the patient life of the poor Breton,
became enthusiastic over him. The Duc d'Orleans asked the price of
the picture. The clergy told Madame la Dauphine that the subject was
suggestive of good thoughts; and there was, in truth, a most satisfying
religious tone about it. Monseigneur the Dauphin admired the dust on
the stone-floor,--a huge blunder, by the way, for Fougeres had painted
greenish tones suggestive of mildew along the base of the walls.
"Madame" finally bought the picture for a thousand francs, and the
Dauphin ordered another like it. Charles X. gave the cross of the Legion
of honor to this son of a peasant who had fought for the royal cause
in 1799. (Joseph Bridau, the great painter, was not yet decorated.) The
minister of the Interior ordered two church pictures of Fougeres.

This Salon of 1829 was to Pierre Grassou his whole fortune, fame,
future, and life. Be original, invent, and you die by inches; copy,
imitate, and you'll live. After this discovery of a gold mine, Grassou
de Fougeres obtained his benefit of the fatal principle to which society
owes the wretched mediocrities to whom are intrusted in these days the
election of leaders in all social classes; who proceed, naturally, to
elect themselves and who wage a bitter war against all true talent. The
principle of election applied indiscriminately is false, and France will
some day abandon it.

Nevertheless the modesty, simplicity, and genuine surprise of the good
and gentle Fougeres silenced all envy and all recriminations. Besides,
he had on his side all of his clan who had succeeded, and all who
expected to succeed. Some persons, touched by the persistent energy of a
man whom nothing had discouraged, talked of Domenichino and said:--

"Perseverance in the arts should be rewarded. Grassou hasn't stolen his
successes; he has delved for ten years, the poor dear man!"

That exclamation of "poor dear man!" counted for half in the support
and the congratulations which the painter received. Pity sets up
mediocrities as envy pulls down great talents, and in equal numbers.
The newspapers, it is true, did not spare criticism, but the chevalier
Fougeres digested them as he had digested the counsel of his friends,
with angelic patience.

Possessing, by this time, fifteen thousand francs, laboriously earned,
he furnished an apartment and studio in the rue de Navarin, and painted
the picture ordered by Monseigneur the Dauphin, also the two church
pictures, and delivered them at the time agreed on, with a punctuality
that was very discomforting to the exchequer of the ministry, accustomed
to a different course of action. But--admire the good fortune of men who
are methodical--if Grassou, belated with his work, had been caught by
the revolution of July he would not have got his money.

By the time he was thirty-seven Fougeres had manufactured for Elie Magus
some two hundred pictures, all of them utterly unknown, by the help of
which he had attained to that satisfying manner, that point of execution
before which the true artist shrugs his shoulders and the bourgeoisie
worships. Fougeres was dear to friends for rectitude of ideas, for
steadiness of sentiment, absolute kindliness, and great loyalty; though
they had no esteem for his palette, they loved the man who held it.

"What a misfortune it is that Fougeres has the vice of painting!" said
his comrades.

But for all this, Grassou gave excellent counsel, like those
feuilletonists incapable of writing a book who know very well where a
book is wanting. There was this difference, however, between literary
critics and Fougeres; he was eminently sensitive to beauties; he felt
them, he acknowledged them, and his advice was instinct with a spirit
of justice that made the justness of his remarks acceptable. After
the revolution of July, Fougeres sent about ten pictures a year to the
Salon, of which the jury admitted four or five. He lived with the most
rigid economy, his household being managed solely by an old charwoman.
For all amusement he visited his friends, he went to see works of art,
he allowed himself a few little trips about France, and he planned to go
to Switzerland in search of inspiration. This detestable artist was an
excellent citizen; he mounted guard duly, went to reviews, and paid his
rent and provision-bills with bourgeois punctuality.

Having lived all his life in toil and poverty, he had never had the time
to love. Poor and a bachelor, until now he did not desire to complicate
his simple life. Incapable of devising any means of increasing his
little fortune, he carried, every three months, to his notary, Cardot,
his quarterly earnings and economies. When the notary had received
about three thousand francs he invested them in some first mortgage, the
interest of which he drew himself and added to the quarterly payments
made to him by Fougeres. The painter was awaiting the fortunate moment
when his property thus laid by would give him the imposing income of two
thousand francs, to allow himself the otium cum dignitate of the
artist and paint pictures; but oh! what pictures! true pictures! each a
finished picture! chouette, Koxnoff, chocnosoff! His future, his dreams
of happiness, the superlative of his hopes--do you know what it was?
To enter the Institute and obtain the grade of officer of the Legion
of honor; to side down beside Schinner and Leon de Lora, to reach the
Academy before Bridau, to wear a rosette in his buttonhole! What a
dream! It is only commonplace men who think of everything.

Hearing the sound of several steps on the staircase, Fougeres rubbed up
his hair, buttoned his jacket of bottle-green velveteen, and was not a
little amazed to see, entering his doorway, a simpleton face vulgarly
called in studio slang a "melon." This fruit surmounted a pumpkin,
clothed in blue cloth adorned with a bunch of tintinnabulating baubles.
The melon puffed like a walrus; the pumpkin advanced on turnips,
improperly called legs. A true painter would have turned the little
bottle-vendor off at once, assuring him that he didn't paint vegetables.
This painter looked at his client without a smile, for Monsieur Vervelle
wore a three-thousand-franc diamond in the bosom of his shirt.

Fougeres glanced at Magus and said: "There's fat in it!" using a slang
term then much in vogue in the studios.

Hearing those words Monsieur Vervelle frowned. The worthy bourgeois drew
after him another complication of vegetables in the persons of his wife
and daughter. The wife had a fine veneer of mahogany on her face, and
in figure she resembled a cocoa-nut, surmounted by a head and tied in
around the waist. She pivoted on her legs, which were tap-rooted,
and her gown was yellow with black stripes. She proudly exhibited
unutterable mittens on a puffy pair of hands; the plumes of a
first-class funeral floated on an over-flowing bonnet; laces adorned
her shoulders, as round behind as they were before; consequently, the
spherical form of the cocoa-nut was perfect. Her feet, of a kind that
painters call abatis, rose above the varnished leather of the shoes in a
swelling that was some inches high. How the feet were ever got into the
shoes, no one knows.

Following these vegetable parents was a young asparagus, who presented
a tiny head with smoothly banded hair of the yellow-carroty tone that a
Roman adores, long, stringy arms, a fairly white skin with reddish spots
upon it, large innocent eyes, and white lashes, scarcely any brows, a
leghorn bonnet bound with white satin and adorned with two honest bows
of the same satin, hands virtuously red, and the feet of her mother. The
faces of these three beings wore, as they looked round the studio, an
air of happiness which bespoke in them a respectable enthusiasm for Art.

"So it is you, monsieur, who are going to take our likenesses?" said the
father, assuming a jaunty air.

"Yes, monsieur," replied Grassou.

"Vervelle, he has the cross!" whispered the wife to the husband while
the painter's back was turned.

"Should I be likely to have our portraits painted by an artist who
wasn't decorated?" returned the former bottle-dealer.

Elie Magus here bowed to the Vervelle family and went away. Grassou
accompanied him to the landing.

"There's no one but you who would fish up such whales."

"One hundred thousand francs of 'dot'!"

"Yes, but what a family!"

"Three hundred thousand francs of expectations, a house in the rue
Boucherat, and a country-house at Ville d'Avray!"

"Bottles and corks! bottles and corks!" said the painter; "they set my
