this moment.

"There's the other half of the Opera receipts--that man who just
went by; the tenor. There is no longer any play, poem, music, or
representation of any kind possible unless some celebrated tenor can
reach a certain note. The tenor is love, he is the Voice that touches
the heart, that vibrates in the soul, and his value is reckoned at a
much higher salary than that of a minister. One hundred thousand
francs for a throat, one hundred thousand francs for a couple of
ankle-bones,--those are the two financial scourges of the Opera."

"I am amazed," said Gazonal, "at the hundreds of thousands of francs
walking about here."

"We'll amaze you a good deal more, my dear cousin," said Leon de Lora.
"We'll take Paris as an artist takes his violoncello, and show you how
it is played,--in short, how people amuse themselves in Paris."

"It is a kaleidoscope with a circumference of twenty miles," cried
Gazonal.

"Before piloting monsieur about, I have to see Gaillard," said Bixiou.

"But we can use Gaillard for the cousin," replied Leon.

"What sort of machine is that?" asked Gazonal.

"He isn't a machine, he is a machinist. Gaillard is a friend of ours who
has ended a miscellaneous career by becoming the editor of a newspaper,
and whose character and finances are governed by movements comparable
to those of the tides. Gaillard can contribute to make you win your
lawsuit--"

"It is lost."

"That's the very moment to win it," replied Bixiou.

When they reached Theodore Gaillard's abode, which was now in the rue
de Menars, the valet ushered the three friends into a boudoir and asked
them to wait, as monsieur was in secret conference.

"With whom?" asked Bixiou.

"With a man who is selling him the incarceration of an _unseizable_
debtor," replied a handsome woman who now appeared in a charming morning
toilet.

"In that case, my dear Suzanne," said Bixiou, "I am certain we may go
in."

"Oh! what a beautiful creature!" said Gazonal.

"That is Madame Gaillard," replied Leon de Lora, speaking low into his
cousin's ear. "She is the most humble-minded woman in Paris, for she had
the public and has contented herself with a husband."

"What is your will, messeigneurs?" said the facetious editor, seeing his
two friends and imitating Frederic Lemaitre.

Theodore Gaillard, formerly a wit, had ended by becoming a stupid man in
consequence of remaining constantly in one centre,--a moral phenomenon
frequently to be observed in Paris. His principal method of conversation
consisted in sowing his speeches with sayings taken from plays then in
vogue and pronounced in imitation of well-known actors.

"We have come to blague," said Leon.

"'Again, young men'" (Odry in the Saltimbauques).

"Well, this time, we've got him, sure," said Gaillard's other visitor,
apparently by way of conclusion.

"_Are_ you sure of it, pere Fromenteau?" asked Gaillard. "This it the
eleventh time you've caught him at night and missed him in the morning."

"How could I help it? I never saw such a debtor! he's a locomotive; goes
to sleep in Paris and wakes up in the Seine-et-Oise. A safety lock I
call him." Seeing a smile on Gaillard's face he added: "That's a
saying in our business. Pinch a man, means arrest him, lock him up.
The criminal police have another term. Vidoeq said to his man, 'You are
served'; that's funnier, for it means the guillotine."

A nudge from Bixiou made Gazonal all eyes and ears.

"Does monsieur grease my paws?" asked Fromenteau of Gaillard, in a
threatening but cool tone.

"'A question that of fifty centimes'" (Les Saltimbauques), replied the
editor, taking out five francs and offering them to Fromenteau.

"And the rapscallions?" said the man.

"What rapscallions?" asked Gaillard.

"Those I employ," replied Fromenteau calmly.

"Is there a lower depth still?" asked Bixiou.

"Yes, monsieur," said the spy. "Some people give us information without
knowing they do so, and without getting paid for it. I put fools and
ninnies below rapscallions."

"They are often original, and witty, your rapscallions!" said Leon.

"Do you belong to the police?" asked Gazonal, eying with uneasy
curiosity the hard, impassible little man, who was dressed like the
third clerk in a sheriff's office.

"Which police do you mean?" asked Fromenteau.

"There are several?"

"As many as five," replied the man. "Criminal, the head of which was
Vidoeq; secret police, which keeps an eye on the other police, the head
of it being always unknown; political police,--that's Fouche's. Then
there's the police of Foreign Affairs, and finally, the palace police
(of the Emperor, Louis XVIII., etc.), always squabbling with that of the
quai Malaquais. It came to an end under Monsieur Decazes. I belonged to
the police of Louis XVIII.; I'd been in it since 1793, with that poor
Contenson."

The four gentlemen looked at each other with one thought: "How many
heads he must have brought to the scaffold!"

"Now-a-days, they are trying to get on without us. Folly!" continued the
little man, who began to seem terrible. "Since 1830 they want honest men
at the prefecture! I resigned, and I've made myself a small vocation by
arresting for debt."

"He is the right arm of the commercial police," said Gaillard in
Bixiou's ear, "but you can never find out who pays him most, the debtor
or the creditor."

"The more rascally a business is, the more honor it needs. I'm for him
who pays me best," continued Fromenteau addressing Gaillard. "You want
to recover fifty thousand francs and you talk farthings to your means
of action. Give me five hundred francs and your man is pinched to-night,
for we spotted him yesterday!"

"Five hundred francs for you alone!" cried Theodore Gaillard.

"Lizette wants a shawl," said the spy, not a muscle of his face moving.
"I call her Lizette because of Beranger."

"You have a Lizette, and you stay in such a business!" cried the
virtuous Gazonal.

"It is amusing! People may cry up the pleasures of hunting and fishing
as much as they like but to stalk a man in Paris is far better fun."

"Certainly," said Gazonal, reflectively, speaking to himself, "they must
have great talent."

"If I were to enumerate the qualities which make a man remarkable in our
vocation," said Fromenteau, whose rapid glance had enabled him to fathom
Gazonal completely, "you'd think I was talking of a man of genius.
First, we must have the eyes of a lynx; next, audacity (to tear into
houses like bombs, accost the servants as if we knew them, and propose
treachery--always agreed to); next, memory, sagacity, invention (to make
schemes, conceived rapidly, never the same--for spying must be guided
by the characters and habits of the persons spied upon; it is a gift
of heaven); and, finally, agility, vigor. All these facilities and
qualities, monsieur, are depicted on the door of the Gymnase-Amoros as
Virtue. Well, we must have them all, under pain of losing the salaries
given us by the State, the rue de Jerusalem, or the minister of
Commerce."

"You certainly seem to me a remarkable man," said Gazonal.

Fromenteau looked at the provincial without replying, without betraying
the smallest sign of feeling, and departed, bowing to no one,--a trait
of real genius.

"Well, cousin, you have now seen the police incarnate," said Leon to
Gazonal.

"It has something the effect of a dinner-pill," said the worthy
provincial, while Gaillard and Bixiou were talking together in a low
voice.

"I'll give you an answer to-night at Carabine's," said Gaillard aloud,
re-seating himself at his desk without seeing or bowing to Gazonal.

"He is a rude fellow!" cried the Southerner as they left the room.

"His paper has twenty-two thousand subscribers," said Leon de Lora.
"He is one of the five great powers of the day, and he hasn't, in
the morning, the time to be polite. Now," continued Leon, speaking to
Bixiou, "if we are going to the Chamber to help him with his lawsuit let
us take the longest way round."

"Words said by great men are like silver-gilt spoons with the gilt
washed off; by dint of repetition they lose their brilliancy," said
Bixiou. "Where shall we go?"

"Here, close by, to our hatter?" replied Leon.

"Bravo!" cried Bixiou. "If we keep on in this way, we shall have an
amusing day of it."

