as the nature of narrow minds induces them to study trifles, Birotteau
plunged suddenly into deep meditation on these four circumstances,
imperceptible in their meaning to others, but to him indicative of four
catastrophes. The total loss of his happiness was evidently foreshadowed
in the neglect to place his slippers, in Marianne's falsehood about
the fire, in the unusual removal of his candlestick to the table of the
antechamber, and in the evident intention to keep him waiting in the
rain.

When the fire was burning on the hearth, and the lamp was lighted, and
Marianne had departed without saying, as usual, "Does Monsieur want
anything more?" the Abbe Birotteau let himself fall gently into the
wide and handsome easy-chair of his late friend; but there was something
mournful in the movement with which he dropped upon it. The good
soul was crushed by a presentiment of coming calamity. His eyes roved
successively to the handsome tall clock, the bureau, curtains, chairs,
carpets, to the stately bed, the basin of holy-water, the crucifix, to
a Virgin by Valentin, a Christ by Lebrun,--in short, to all the
accessories of this cherished room, while his face expressed the anguish
of the tenderest farewell that a lover ever took of his first mistress,
or an old man of his lately planted trees. The vicar had just perceived,
somewhat late it is true, the signs of a dumb persecution instituted
against him for the last three months by Mademoiselle Gamard, whose
evil intentions would doubtless have been fathomed much sooner by a more
intelligent man. Old maids have a special talent for accentuating the
words and actions which their dislikes suggest to them. They scratch
like cats. They not only wound but they take pleasure in wounding, and
in making their victim see that he is wounded. A man of the world would
never have allowed himself to be scratched twice; the good abbe, on the
contrary, had taken several blows from those sharp claws before he could
be brought to believe in any evil intention.

But when he did perceive it, he set to work, with the inquisitorial
sagacity which priests acquire by directing consciences and burrowing
into the nothings of the confessional, to establish, as though it were
a matter of religious controversy, the following proposition: "Admitting
that Mademoiselle Gamard did not remember it was Madame de Listomere's
evening, and that Marianne did think I was home, and did really forget
to make my fire, it is impossible, inasmuch as I myself took down my
candlestick this morning, that Mademoiselle Gamard, seeing it in her
salon, could have supposed I had gone to bed. Ergo, Mademoiselle Gamard
intended that I should stand out in the rain, and, by carrying my
candlestick upstairs, she meant to make me understand it. What does it
all mean?" he said aloud, roused by the gravity of these circumstances,
and rising as he spoke to take off his damp clothes, get into his
dressing-gown, and do up his head for the night. Then he returned from
the bed to the fireplace, gesticulating, and launching forth in various
tones the following sentences, all of which ended in a high falsetto
key, like notes of interjection:

"What the deuce have I done to her? Why is she angry with me? Marianne
did _not_ forget my fire! Mademoiselle told her not to light it! I must
be a child if I can't see, from the tone and manner she has been taking
to me, that I've done something to displease her. Nothing like it ever
happened to Chapeloud! I can't live in the midst of such torments as--At
my age--"

He went to bed hoping that the morrow might enlighten him on the causes
of the dislike which threatened to destroy forever the happiness he had
now enjoyed two years after wishing for it so long. Alas! the secret
reasons for the inimical feelings Mademoiselle Gamard bore to the
luckless abbe were fated to remain eternally unknown to him,--not that
they were difficult to fathom, but simply because he lacked the good
faith and candor by which great souls and scoundrels look within and
judge themselves. A man of genius or a trickster says to himself, "I
did wrong." Self-interest and native talent are the only infallible
and lucid guides. Now the Abbe Birotteau, whose goodness amounted to
stupidity, whose knowledge was only, as it were, plastered on him by
dint of study, who had no experience whatever of the world and its ways,
who lived between the mass and the confessional, chiefly occupied
in dealing the most trivial matters of conscience in his capacity
of confessor to all the schools in town and to a few noble souls who
rightly appreciated him,--the Abbe Birotteau must be regarded as a
great child, to whom most of the practices of social life were
utterly unknown. And yet, the natural selfishness of all human beings,
reinforced by the selfishness peculiar to the priesthood and that of
the narrow life of the provinces had insensibly, and unknown to himself,
developed within him. If any one had felt enough interest in the good
man to probe his spirit and prove to him that in the numerous petty
details of his life and in the minute duties of his daily existence he
was essentially lacking in the self-sacrifice he professed, he would
have punished and mortified himself in good faith. But those whom we
offend by such unconscious selfishness pay little heed to our real
innocence; what they want is vengeance, and they take it. Thus it
happened that Birotteau, weak brother that he was, was made to undergo
the decrees of that great distributive Justice which goes about
compelling the world to execute its judgments,--called by ninnies "the
misfortunes of life."

There was this difference between the late Chapeloud and the vicar,--one
was a shrewd and clever egoist, the other a simple-minded and clumsy
one. When the canon went to board with Mademoiselle Gamard he knew
exactly how to judge of his landlady's character. The confessional had
taught him to understand the bitterness that the sense of being kept
outside the social pale puts into the heart of an old maid; he therefore
calculated his own treatment of Mademoiselle Gamard very wisely. She was
then about thirty-eight years old, and still retained a few pretensions,
which, in well-behaved persons of her condition, change, rather later,
into strong personal self-esteem. The canon saw plainly that to live
comfortably with his landlady he must pay her invariably the same
attentions and be more infallible than the pope himself. To compass this
result, he allowed no points of contact between himself and her except
those that politeness demanded, and those which necessarily exist
between two persons living under the same roof. Thus, though he and
the Abbe Troubert took their regular three meals a day, he avoided the
family breakfast by inducing Mademoiselle Gamard to send his coffee to
his own room. He also avoided the annoyance of supper by taking tea in
the houses of friends with whom he spent his evenings. In this way he
seldom saw his landlady except at dinner; but he always came down to
that meal a few minutes in advance of the hour. During this visit of
courtesy, as it may be called, he talked to her, for the twelve years he
had lived under her roof, on nearly the same topics, receiving from her
the same answers. How she had slept, her breakfast, the trivial domestic
events, her looks, her health, the weather, the time the church services
had lasted, the incidents of the mass, the health of such or such a
priest,--these were the subjects of their daily conversation. During
dinner he invariably paid her certain indirect compliments; the fish
had an excellent flavor; the seasoning of a sauce was delicious;
Mademoiselle Gamard's capacities and virtues as mistress of a household
were great. He was sure of flattering the old maid's vanity by praising
the skill with which she made or prepared her preserves and pickles and
pates and other gastronomical inventions. To cap all, the wily canon
never left his landlady's yellow salon after dinner without remarking
that there was no house in Tours where he could get such good coffee as
that he had just imbibed.

Thanks to this thorough understanding of Mademoiselle Gamard's
character, and to the science of existence which he had put in practice
for the last twelve years, no matter of discussion on the internal
arrangements of the household had ever come up between them. The Abbe
Chapeloud had taken note of the spinster's angles, asperities, and
crabbedness, and had so arranged his avoidance of her that he obtained
without the least difficulty all the concessions that were necessary
to the happiness and tranquility of his life. The result was that
Mademoiselle Gamard frequently remarked to her friends and acquaintances
that the Abbe Chapeloud was a very amiable man, extremely easy to live
with, and a fine mind.

As to her other lodger, the Abbe Troubert, she said absolutely nothing
about him. Completely involved in the round of her life, like a
satellite in the orbit of a planet, Troubert was to her a sort of
intermediary creature between the individuals of the human species
and those of the canine species; he was classed in her heart next, but
directly before, the place intended for friends but now occupied by
a fat and wheezy pug which she tenderly loved. She ruled Troubert
completely, and the intermingling of their interests was so obvious that
many persons of her social sphere believed that the Abbe Troubert had
designs on the old maid's property, and was binding her to him unawares
with infinite patience, and really directing her while he seemed to be
obeying without ever letting her perceive in him the slightest wish on
his part to govern her.

When the Abbe Chapeloud died, the old maid, who desired a lodger with
quiet ways, naturally thought of the vicar. Before the canon's will was
made known she had meditated offering his rooms to the Abbe Troubert,
who was not very comfortable on the ground-floor. But when the Abbe
Birotteau, on receiving his legacy, came to settle in writing the terms
of his board she saw he was so in love with the apartment, for which he
might now admit his long cherished desires, that she dared not propose
the exchange, and accordingly sacrificed her sentiments of friendship to
the demands of self-interest. But in order to console her beloved canon,
Mademoiselle took up the large white Chateau-Renaud bricks that made
the floors of his apartment and replaced them by wooden floors laid in
"point de Hongrie." She also rebuilt a smoky chimney.

For twelve years the Abbe Birotteau had seen his friend Chapeloud in
that house without ever giving a thought to the motive of the canon's
extreme circumspection in his relations to Mademoiselle Gamard. When he
came himself to live with that saintly woman he was in the condition
of a lover on the point of being made happy. Even if he had not been
by nature purblind of intellect, his eyes were too dazzled by his new
happiness to allow him to judge of the landlady, or to reflect on the
limits which he ought to impose on their daily intercourse. Mademoiselle
Gamard, seen from afar and through the prism of those material
felicities which the vicar dreamed of enjoying in her house, seemed to
him a perfect being, a faultless Christian, essentially charitable, the
woman of the Gospel, the wise virgin, adorned by all those humble and
modest virtues which shed celestial fragrance upon life.

So, with the enthusiasm of one who attains an object long desired, with
the candor of a child, and the blundering foolishness of an old
man utterly without worldly experience, he fell into the life of
Mademoiselle Gamard precisely as a fly is caught in a spider's web. The
first day that he went to dine and sleep at the house he was detained in
the salon after dinner, partly to make his landlady's acquaintance, but
chiefly by that inexplicable embarrassment which often assails
timid people and makes them fear to seem impolite by breaking off a
conversation in order to take leave. Consequently he remained there the
whole evening. Then a friend of his, a certain Mademoiselle Salomon
de Villenoix, came to see him, and this gave Mademoiselle Gamard the
happiness of forming a card-table; so that when the vicar went to bed he
felt that he had passed a very agreeable evening. Knowing Mademoiselle
Gamard and the Abbe Troubert but slightly, he saw only the superficial
aspects of their characters; few persons bare their defects at once,
they generally take on a becoming veneer.

The worthy abbe was thus led to suggest to himself the charming plan of
devoting all his evenings to Mademoiselle Gamard, instead of spending
them, as Chapeloud had done, elsewhere. The old maid had for years been
possessed by a desire which grew stronger day by day. This desire,
