
Have you ever, for your happiness, met a woman whose harmonious voice
gives to her speech the same charm that emanates from her manners? a
woman who knows how to speak and to be silent, whose words are happily
chosen, whose language is pure, and who concerns herself in your
interests with delicacy? Her raillery is caressing, her criticism never
wounds; she neither discourses nor argues, but she likes to lead a
discussion and stop it at the right moment. Her manner is affable and
smiling, her politeness never forced, her readiness to serve others
never servile; she reduces the respect she claims to a soft shadow;
she never wearies you, and you leave her satisfied with her and with
yourself. Her charming grace is conveyed to all the things with which
she surrounds herself. Everything about her pleases the eye; in her
presence you breathe, as it were, your native air. This woman is
natural. There is no effort about her; she is aiming at no effect; her
feelings are shown simply, because they are true. Frank herself, she
does not wound the vanity of others; she accepts men as God made them;
pitying the vicious, forgiving defects and absurdities, comprehending
all ages, and vexed by nothing, because she has had the sense and tact
to foresee all. Tender and gay, she gratifies before she consoles. You
love her so well that if this angel did wrong you would be ready to
excuse her. If, for your happiness, you have met with such a woman, you
know Madame Firmiani.

After Monsieur de Bourbonne had talked with her for ten minutes, sitting
beside her, his nephew was forgiven. He perceived that whatever the
actual truth might be, the relation between Madame Firmiani and Octave
covered some mystery. Returning to the illusions that gild the days
of youth, and judging Madame Firmiani by her beauty, the old gentleman
became convinced that a woman so innately conscious of her dignity as
she appeared to be was incapable of a bad action. Her dark eyes told of
inward peace; the lines of her face were so noble, the profile so pure,
and the passion he had come to investigate seemed so little to oppress
her heart, that the old man said to himself, while noting all the
promises of love and virtue given by that adorable countenance, "My
nephew is committing some folly."

Madame Firmiani acknowledged to twenty-five. But the Practicals proved
that having married the invisible Firmiani (then a highly respectable
individual in the forties) in 1813, at the age of sixteen, she must be
at least twenty-eight in 1825. However the same persons also asserted
that at no period of her life had she ever been so desirable or so
completely a woman. She was now at an age when women are most prone to
conceive a passion, and to desire it, perhaps, in their pensive hours.
She possessed all that earth sells, all that it lends, all that
it gives. The Attaches declared there was nothing of which she was
ignorant; the Contradictors asserted that there was much she ought to
learn; the Observers remarked that her hands were white, her feet small,
her movements a trifle too undulating. But, nevertheless, individuals of
all species envied or disputed Octave's happiness, agreeing, for once
in a way, that Madame Firmiani was the most aristocratically beautiful
woman in Paris.

Still young, rich, a perfect musician, intelligent, witty, refined,
and received (as a Cadignan) by the Princesse de Blamont-Chauvry,
that oracle of the noble faubourg, loved by her rivals the Duchesse
de Maufrigneuse her cousin, the Marquise d'Espard, and Madame de
Macumer,--Madame Firmiani gratified all the vanities which feed or
excite love. She was therefore sought by too many men not to fall a
victim to Parisian malice and its charming calumnies, whispered behind
a fan or in a safe aside. It was necessary to quote the remarks given
at the beginning of this history to bring out the true Firmiani in
contradistinction to the Firmiani of society. If some women forgave
her happiness, others did not forgive her propriety. Now nothing is so
dangerous in Paris as unfounded suspicions,--for the reason that it is
impossible to destroy them.

This sketch of a woman who was admirably natural gives only a faint idea
of her. It would need the pencil of an Ingres to render the pride of
that brow, with its wealth of hair, the dignity of that glance, and the
thoughts betrayed by the changing colors of her cheeks. In her were all
things; poets could have found an Agnes Sorel and a Joan of Arc, also
the woman unknown, the Soul within that form, the soul of Eve, the
knowledge of the treasures of good and the riches of evil, error and
resignation, crime and devotion, the Donna Julia and the Haidee of Lord
Byron.

The former guardsman stayed, with apparent impertinence, after the
other guests had left the salons; and Madame Firmiani found him sitting
quietly before her in an armchair, evidently determined to remain, with
the pertinacity of a fly which we are forced to kill to get rid of it.
The hands of the clock marked two in the morning.

"Madame," said the old gentlemen, as Madame Firmiani rose, hoping to
make him understand that it was her good pleasure he should go, "Madame,
I am the uncle of Monsieur Octave de Camps."

Madame Firmiani immediately sat down again, and showed her emotion. In
spite of his sagacity the old Planter was unable to decide whether
she turned pale from shame or pleasure. There are pleasures, delicious
emotions the chaste heart seeks to veil, which cannot escape the shock
of startled modesty. The more delicacy a woman has, the more she seeks
to hide the joys that are in her soul. Many women, incomprehensible in
their tender caprices, long to hear a name pronounced which at other
times they desire to bury in their hearts. Monsieur de Bourbonne did not
interpret Madame Firmiani's agitation exactly in this way: pray forgive
him, all provincials are distrustful.

"Well, monsieur?" said Madame Firmiani, giving him one of those clear,
lucid glances in which we men can never see anything because they
question us too much.

"Well, madame," returned the old man, "do you know what some one came to
tell me in the depths of my province? That my nephew had ruined himself
for you, and that the poor fellow was living in a garret while you were
in silk and gold. Forgive my rustic sincerity; it may be useful for you
to know of these calumnies."

"Stop, monsieur," said Madame Firmiani, with an imperative gesture; "I
know all that. You are too polite to continue this subject if I request
you to leave it, and too gallant--in the old-fashioned sense of the
word," she added with a slight tone of irony--"not to agree that you
have no right to question me. It would be ridiculous in me to defend
myself. I trust that you will have a sufficiently good opinion of my
character to believe in the profound contempt which, I assure you, I
feel for money,--although I was married, without any fortune, to a man
of immense wealth. It is nothing to me whether your nephew is rich or
poor; if I have received him in my house, and do now receive him, it
is because I consider him worthy to be counted among my friends. All
my friends, monsieur, respect each other; they know that I have not
philosophy enough to admit into my house those I do not esteem; this may
argue a want of charity; but my guardian-angel has maintained in me to
this day a profound aversion for tattle, and also for dishonesty."

Through the ring of her voice was slightly raised during the first
part of this answer, the last words were said with the ease and
self-possession of Celimene bantering the Misanthrope.

"Madame," said Monsieur de Bourbonne, in a voice of some emotion, "I
am an old man; I am almost Octave's father, and I ask your pardon most
humbly for the question that I shall now venture to put to you, giving
you my word of honor as a loyal gentleman that your answer shall die
here,"--laying his hand upon his heart, with an old-fashioned gesture
that was truly religious. "Are these rumors true; do you love Octave?"

"Monsieur," she replied, "to any other man I should answer that question
only by a look; but to you, and because you are indeed almost the father
of Monsieur de Camps, I reply by asking what you would think of a woman
if to such a question she answered _you_? To avow our love for him we
love, when he loves us--ah! that may be; but even when we are certain of
being loved forever, believe me, monsieur, it is an effort for us, and a
reward to him. To say to another!--"

She did not end her sentence, but rose, bowed to the old man, and
withdrew into her private apartments, the doors of which, opening and
closing behind her, had a language of their own to his sagacious ears.

"Ah! the mischief!" thought he; "what a woman! she is either a sly one
or an angel"; and he got into his hired coach, the horses of which were
stamping on the pavement of the silent courtyard, while the coachman
was asleep on his box after cursing for the hundredth time his tardy
customer.

The next morning about eight o'clock the old gentleman mounted the
stairs of a house in the rue de l'Observance where Octave de Camps was
living. If there was ever an astonished man it was the young professor
when he beheld his uncle. The door was unlocked, his lamp still burning;
he had been sitting up all night.

"You rascal!" said Monsieur de Bourbonne, sitting down in the nearest
chair; "since when is it the fashion to laugh at uncles who have
twenty-six thousand francs a year from solid acres to which we are the
sole heir? Let me tell you that in the olden time we stood in awe of
such uncles as that. Come, speak up, what fault have you to find with
me? Haven't I played my part as uncle properly? Did I ever require you
to respect me? Have I ever refused you money? When did I shut the door
in your face on pretence that you had come to look after my health?
Haven't you had the most accommodating and the least domineering uncle
that there is in France,--I won't say Europe, because that might be too
presumptuous. You write to me, or you don't write,--no matter, I live
on pledged affection, and I am making you the prettiest estate in all
Touraine, the envy of the department. To be sure, I don't intend to
let you have it till the last possible moment, but that's an excusable
little fancy, isn't it? And what does monsieur himself do?--sells his
own property and lives like a lackey!--"

"Uncle--"

"I'm not talking about uncles, I'm talking nephew. I have a right to
your confidence. Come, confess at once; it is much the easiest way; I
know that by experience. Have you been gambling? have you lost money
at the Bourse? Say, 'Uncle, I'm a wretch,' and I'll hug you. But if you
tell me any lies greater than those I used to tell at your age I'll
sell my property, buy an annuity, and go back to the evil ways of my
youth--if I can."

"Uncle--"

"I saw your Madame Firmiani yesterday," went on the old fellow, kissing
the tips of his fingers, which he gathered into a bunch. "She is
charming. You have the consent and approbation of your uncle, if that
will do you any good. As to the sanction of the Church I suppose that's
useless, and the sacraments cost so much in these days. Come, speak out,
have you ruined yourself for her?"

"Yes, uncle."

"Ha! the jade! I'd have wagered it. In my time the women of the court
were cleverer at ruining a man than the courtesans of to-day; but this
one--I recognized her!--it is a bit of the last century."
