So saying she pulled the bell-cord (an exquisite bit of needlework). A
footman entered, dressed like a minister.

"Tell Captain Paz that I wish to see him."

"If you think you are going to find out anything that way--" said Comte
Adam, laughing.

It is well to mention that Adam and Clementine, married in December,
1835, had gone soon after the wedding to Italy, Switzerland, and
Germany, where they spent the greater part of two years. Returning to
Paris in November, 1837, the countess entered society for the first time
as a married woman during the winter which had just ended, and she then
became aware of the existence, half-suppressed and wholly dumb but very
useful, of a species of factotum who was personally invisible, named
Paz,--spelt thus, but pronounced "Patz."

"Monsieur le capitaine Paz begs Madame la comtesse to excuse him," said
the footman, returning. "He is at the stables; as soon as he has changed
his dress Comte Paz will present himself to Madame."

"What was he doing at the stables?"

"He was showing them how to groom Madame's horse," said the man. "He was
not pleased with the way Constantin did it."

The countess looked at the footman. He was perfectly serious and did not
add to his words the sort of smile by which servants usually comment
on the actions of a superior who seems to them to derogate from his
position.

"Ah! he was grooming Cora."

"Madame la comtesse intends to ride out this morning?" said the footman,
leaving the room without further answer.

"Is Paz a Pole?" asked Clementine, turning to her husband, who nodded by
way of affirmation.

Madame Laginska was silent, examining Adam. With her feet extended upon
a cushion and her head poised like that of a bird on the edge of
its nest listening to the noises in a grove, she would have seemed
enchanting even to a blase man. Fair and slender, and wearing her
hair in curls, she was not unlike those semi-romantic pictures in
the Keepsakes, especially when dressed, as she was this morning, in a
breakfast gown of Persian silk, the folds of which could not disguise
the beauty of her figure or the slimness of her waist. The silk with its
brilliant colors being crossed upon the bosom showed the spring of the
neck,--its whiteness contrasting delightfully against the tones of a
guipure lace which lay upon her shoulders. Her eyes and their long
black lashes added at this moment to the expression of curiosity which
puckered her pretty mouth. On the forehead, which was well modelled,
an observer would have noticed a roundness characteristic of the true
Parisian woman,--self-willed, merry, well-informed, but inaccessible
to vulgar seductions. Her hands, which were almost transparent, were
hanging down at the end of each arm of her chair; the tapering fingers,
slightly turned up at their points, showed nails like almonds, which
caught the light. Adam smiled at his wife's impatience, and looked at
her with a glance which two years of married life had not yet chilled.
Already the little countess had made herself mistress of the situation,
for she scarcely paid attention to her husband's admiration. In fact,
in the look which she occasionally cast at him, there seemed to be the
consciousness of a Frenchwoman's ascendancy over the puny, volatile, and
red-haired Pole.

"Here comes Paz," said the count, hearing a step which echoed through
the gallery.

The countess beheld a tall and handsome man, well-made, and bearing
on his face the signs of pain which come of inward strength and secret
endurance of sorrow. He wore one of those tight, frogged overcoats which
were then called "polonaise." Thick, black hair, rather unkempt, covered
his square head, and Clementine noticed his broad forehead shining like
a block of white marble, for Paz held his visored cap in his hand.
The hand itself was like that of the Infant Hercules. Robust health
flourished on his face, which was divided by a large Roman nose and
reminded Clementine of some handsome Transteverino. A black silk cravat
added to the martial appearance of this six-foot mystery, with eyes of
jet and Italian fervor. The amplitude of his pleated trousers, which
allowed only the tips of his boots to be seen, revealed his faithfulness
to the fashions of his own land. There was something really burlesque
to a romantic woman in the striking contrast no one could fail to remark
between the captain and the count, the little Pole with his pinched face
and the stalwart soldier.

"Good morning, Adam," he said familiarly. Then he bowed courteously as
he asked Clementine what he could do for her.

"You are Laginski's friend!" exclaimed the countess.

"For life and death," answered Paz, to whom the count threw a smile of
affection as he drew a last puff from his perfumed pipe.

"Then why don't you take your meals with us? why did you not accompany
us to Italy and Switzerland? why do you hide yourself in such a way that
I am unable to thank you for the constant services that you do for us?"
said the countess, with much vivacity of manner but no feeling.

In fact, she thought she perceived in Paz a sort of voluntary servitude.
Such an idea carried with it in her mind a certain contempt for a social
amphibian, a being half-secretary, half-bailiff, and yet neither the one
nor the other, a poor relation, an embarrassing friend.

"Because, countess," he answered with perfect ease of manner, "there are
no thanks due. I am Adam's friend, and it gives me pleasure to take care
of his interests."

"And you remain standing for your pleasure, too," remarked Comte Adam.

Paz sat down on a chair near the door.

"I remember seeing you about the time I was married, and afterwards
in the courtyard," said Clementine. "But why do you put yourself in a
position of inferiority,--you, Adam's friend?"

"I am perfectly indifferent to the opinion of the Parisians," he
replied. "I live for myself, or, if you like, for you two."

"But the opinion of the world as to a friend of my husband is not
indifferent to me--"

"Ah, madame, the world will be satisfied if you tell them I am 'an
original.'"

After a moment's silence he added, "Are you going out to-day?"

"Will you come with us to the Bois?"

"Certainly."

So saying, Paz bowed and withdrew.

"What a good soul he is!" said Adam. "He has all the simplicity of a
child."

"Now tell me all about your relations with him," said Clementine.

"Paz, my dear," said Laginski, "belongs to a noble family as old and
illustrious as our own. One of the Pazzi of Florence, at the time of
their disasters, fled to Poland, where he settled with some of his
property and founded the Paz family, to which the title of count was
granted. This family, which distinguished itself greatly in the glorious
days of our royal republic, became rich. The graft from the tree that
was felled in Italy flourished so vigorously in Poland that there are
several branches of the family still there. I need not tell you that
some are rich and some are poor. Our Paz is the scion of a poor branch.
He was an orphan, without other fortune than his sword, when he served
in the regiment of the Grand Duke Constantine at the time of our
revolution. Joining the Polish cause, he fought like a Pole, like a
patriot, like a man who has nothing,--three good reasons for fighting
well. In his last affair, thinking he was followed by his men, he dashed
upon a Russian battery and was taken prisoner. I was there. His brave
act roused me. 'Let us go and get him!' I said to my troop, and we
charged the battery like a lot of foragers. I got Paz--I was the seventh
man; we started twenty and came back eight, counting Paz. After Warsaw
was sold we were forced to escape those Russians. By a curious chance,
Paz and I happened to come together again, at the same hour and the same
place, on the other side of the Vistula. I saw the poor captain arrested
by some Prussians, who made themselves the blood-hounds of the Russians.
When we have fished a man out of the Styx we cling to him. This new
danger for poor Paz made me so unhappy that I let myself be taken too,
thinking I could help him. Two men can get away where one will
perish. Thanks to my name and some family connections in Prussia, the
authorities shut their eyes to my escape. I got my dear captain through
as a man of no consequence, a family servant, and we reached Dantzic.
There we got on board a Dutch vessel and went to London. It took us two
months to get there. My mother was ill in England, and expecting me.
Paz and I took care of her till her death, which the Polish troubles
hastened. Then we left London and came to France. Men who go through
such adversities become like brothers. When I reached Paris, at
twenty-two years of age, and found I had an income of over sixty
thousand francs a year, without counting the proceeds of the diamonds
and the pictures sold by my mother, I wanted to secure the future of
my dear Paz before I launched into dissipation. I had often noticed the
sadness in his eyes--sometimes tears were in them. I had had good reason
to understand his soul, which is noble, grand, and generous to the core.
I thought he might not like to be bound by benefits to a friend who
was six years younger than himself, unless he could repay them. I was
careless and frivolous, just as a young fellow is, and I knew I was
certain to ruin myself at play, or get inveigled by some woman, and Paz
and I might then be parted; and though I had every intention of always
looking out for him, I knew I might sometime or other forget to provide
for him. In short, my dear angel, I wanted to spare him the pain and
mortification of having to ask me for money, or of having to hunt me up
if he got into distress. SO, one morning, after breakfast, when we were
sitting with our feet on the andirons smoking pipes, I produced,--with
the utmost precaution, for I saw him look at me uneasily,--a certificate
of the Funds payable to bearer for a certain sum of money a year."

Clementine jumped up and went and seated herself on Adam's knee, put
her arms round his neck, and kissed him. "Dear treasure!" she said, "how
handsome he is! Well, what did Paz do?"

"Thaddeus turned pale," said the count, "but he didn't say a word."

"Oh! his name is Thaddeus, is it?"

"Yes; Thaddeus folded the paper and gave it back to me, and then he
said: 'I thought, Adam, that we were one for life or death, and that we
should never part. Do you want to be rid of me?' 'Oh!' I said, 'if you
