sole thought, to find out those who love to think of them and for them.
If you really love children, the dear little ones, with open hearts and
unerring sense of justice, are marvelously ready to respond to love.
Their love knows passion and jealousy and the most gracious delicacy
of feeling; they find the tenderest words of expression; they trust
you--put an entire belief in you. Perhaps there are no undutiful
children without undutiful mothers, for a child's affection is always
in proportion to the affection that it receives--in early care, in the
first words that it hears, in the response of the eyes to which a child
first looks for love and life. All these things draw them closer to the
mother or drive them apart. God lays the child under the mother's heart,
that she may learn that for a long time to come her heart must be
its home. And yet--there are mothers cruelly slighted, mothers whose
sublime, pathetic tenderness meets only a harsh return, a hideous
ingratitude which shows how difficult it is to lay down hard-and-fast
rules in matters of feeling.

Here, not one of all the thousand heart ties that bind child and mother
had been broken. The three were alone in the world; they lived one life,
a life of close sympathy. If Mme. Willemsens was silent in the morning,
Louis and Marie would not speak, respecting everything in her, even
those thoughts which they did not share. But the older boy, with a
precocious power of thought, would not rest satisfied with his mother's
assertion that she was perfectly well. He scanned her face with uneasy
forebodings; the exact danger he did not know, but dimly he felt it
threatening in those purple rings about her eyes, in the deepening
hollows under them, and the feverish red that deepened in her face. If
Marie's play began to tire her, his sensitive tact was quick to discover
this, and he would call to his brother:

"Come, Marie! let us run in to breakfast, I am hungry!"

But when they reached the door, he would look back to catch the
expression on his mother's face. She still could find a smile for him,
nay, often there were tears in her eyes when some little thing revealed
her child's exquisite feeling, a too early comprehension of sorrow.

Mme. Willemsens dressed during the children's early breakfast and game
of play; she was coquettish for her darlings; she wished to be pleasing
in their eyes; for them she would fain be in all things lovely, a
gracious vision, with the charm of some sweet perfume of which one can
never have enough.

She was always dressed in time to hear their lessons, which lasted from
ten till three, with an interval at noon for lunch, the three taking the
meal together in the summer-house. After lunch the children played for
an hour, while she--poor woman and happy mother--lay on a long sofa
in the summer-house, so placed that she could look out over the soft,
ever-changing country of Touraine, a land that you learn to see afresh
in all the thousand chance effects produced by daylight and sky and the
time of year.

The children scampered through the orchard, scrambled about the
terraces, chased the lizards, scarcely less nimble than they;
investigating flowers and seeds and insects, continually referring all
questions to their mother, running to and fro between the garden and the
summer-house. Children have no need of toys in the country, everything
amuses them.

Mme. Willemsens sat at her embroidery during their lessons. She
never spoke, nor did she look at masters or pupils; but she followed
attentively all that was said, striving to gather the sense of the words
to gain a general idea of Louis' progress. If Louis asked a question
that puzzled his master, his mother's eyes suddenly lighted up, and she
would smile and glance at him with hope in her eyes. Of Marie she asked
little. Her desire was with her eldest son. Already she treated him,
as it were, respectfully, using all a woman's, all a mother's tact to
arouse the spirit of high endeavor in the boy, to teach him to think of
himself as capable of great things. She did this with a secret purpose,
which Louis was to understand in the future; nay, he understood it
already.

Always, the lesson over, she went as far as the gate with the master,
and asked strict account of Louis' progress. So kindly and so winning
was her manner, that his tutors told her the truth, pointing out where
Louis was weak, so that she might help him in his lessons. Then came
dinner, and play after dinner, then a walk, and lessons were learned
till bedtime.

So their days went. It was a uniform but full life; work and amusements
left them not a dull hour in the day. Discouragement and quarreling
were impossible. The mother's boundless love made everything smooth.
She taught her little sons moderation by refusing them nothing, and
submission by making them see underlying Necessity in its many forms;
she put heart into them with timely praise; developing and strengthening
all that was best in their natures with the care of a good fairy. Tears
sometimes rose to her burning eyes as she watched them play, and thought
how they had never caused her the slightest vexation. Happiness
so far-reaching and complete brings such tears, because for us it
represents the dim imaginings of Heaven which we all of us form in our
minds.

Those were delicious hours spent on that sofa in the garden-house,
in looking out on sunny days over the wide stretches of river and the
picturesque landscape, listening to the sound of her children's voices
as they laughed at their own laughter, to the little quarrels that told
most plainly of their union of heart, of Louis' paternal care of Marie,
of the love that both of them felt for her. They spoke English
and French equally well (they had had an English nurse since their
babyhood), so their mother talked to them in both languages; directing
the bent of their childish minds with admirable skill, admitting
no fallacious reasoning, no bad principle. She ruled by kindness,
concealing nothing, explaining everything. If Louis wished for books,
she was careful to give him interesting yet accurate books--books of
biography, the lives of great seamen, great captains, and famous men,
for little incidents in their history gave her numberless opportunities
of explaining the world and life to her children. She would point
out the ways in which men, really great in themselves, had risen from
obscurity; how they had started from the lowest ranks of society, with
no one to look to but themselves, and achieved noble destinies.

These readings, and they were not the least useful of Louis' lessons,
took place while little Marie slept on his mother's knee in the quiet of
the summer night, and the Loire reflected the sky; but when they ended,
this adorable woman's sadness always seemed to be doubled; she would
cease to speak, and sit motionless and pensive, and her eyes would fill
with tears.

"Mother, why are you crying?" Louis asked one balmy June evening, just
as the twilight of a soft-lit night succeeded to a hot day.

Deeply moved by his trouble, she put her arm about the child's neck and
drew him to her.

"Because, my boy, the lot of Jameray Duval, the poor and friendless lad
who succeeded at last, will be your lot, yours and your brother's, and
I have brought it upon you. Before very long, dear child, you will be
alone in the world, with no one to help or befriend you. While you are
still children, I shall leave you, and yet, if only I could wait till
you are big enough and know enough to be Marie's guardian! But I shall
not live so long. I love you so much that it makes me very unhappy to
think of it. Dear children, if only you do not curse me some day!----"

"But why should I curse you some day, mother?"

"Some day," she said, kissing him on the forehead, "you will find out
that I have wronged you. I am going to leave you, here, without money,
without"--and she hesitated--"without a father," she added, and at the
word she burst into tears and put the boy from her gently. A sort of
intuition told Louis that his mother wished to be alone, and he carried
off Marie, now half awake. An hour later, when his brother was in bed,
he stole down and out to the summer-house where his mother was sitting.

"Louis! come here."

The words were spoken in tones delicious to his heart. The boy sprang to
his mother's arms, and the two held each other in an almost convulsive
embrace.

"_Cherie_," he said at last, the name by which he often called her,
finding that even loving words were too weak to express his feeling,
"_cherie_, why are you afraid that you are going to die?"

"I am ill, my poor darling; every day I am losing strength, and there is
no cure for my illness; I know that."

"What is the matter with you?"

"Something that I ought to forget; something that you must never
know.--You must not know what caused my death."

The boy was silent for a while. He stole a glance now and again at
his mother; and she, with her eyes raised to the sky, was watching the
clouds. It was a sad, sweet moment. Louis could not believe that his
mother would die soon, but instinctively he felt trouble which he could
not guess. He respected her long musings. If he had been rather older,
he would have read happy memories blended with thoughts of repentance,
the whole story of a woman's life in that sublime face--the careless
childhood, the loveless marriage, a terrible passion, flowers springing
up in storm and struck down by the thunderbolt into an abyss from which
there is no return.

"Darling mother," Louis said at last, "why do you hide your pain from
me?"

"My boy, we ought to hide our troubles from strangers," she said; "we
should show them a smiling face, never speak of ourselves to them, nor
think about ourselves; and these rules, put in practice in family life,
conduce to its happiness. You will have much to bear one day! Ah me!
then think of your poor mother who died smiling before your eyes, hiding
her sufferings from you, and you will take courage to endure the ills of
life."

She choked back her tears, and tried to make the boy understand
the mechanism of existence, the value of money, the standing and
consideration that it gives, and its bearing on social position;
the honorable means of gaining a livelihood, and the necessity of a
training. Then she told him that one of the chief causes of her sadness
and her tears was the thought that, on the morrow of her death, he and
Marie would be left almost resourceless, with but a slender stock of
money, and no friend but God.

"How quick I must be about learning!" cried Louis, giving her a piteous,
searching look.

"Oh! how happy I am!" she said, showering kisses and tears on her son.
"He understands me!--Louis," she went on, "you will be your brother's
guardian, will you not? You promise me that? You are no longer a child!"

"Yes, I promise," he said; "but you are not going to die yet--say that
