the suburbs of Neuwied. Like all the manufacturers of that region, he
wore a surtout coat of common cloth, waistcoat and breeches of dark
green velveteen, stout boots, and a broad leather belt. His face was
round, his manners frank and cordial; but during the evening he seemed
unable to disguise altogether some secret apprehension or, possibly,
some anxious care. The innkeeper's opinion has always been that
this German merchant was fleeing his country. Later I heard that his
manufactory had been burned by one of those unfortunate chances so
frequent in times of war. In spite of its anxious expression the man's
face showed great kindliness. His features were handsome; and the
whiteness of his stout throat was well set off by a black cravat, a fact
which Wilhelm showed jestingly to Prosper."

Here Monsieur Taillefer drank another glass of water.]

Prosper courteously proposed that the merchant should share their
supper, and Wahlenfer accepted the offer without ceremony, like a man
who feels himself able to return a civility. He placed his valise on the
floor and put his feet on it, took off his hat and gloves and removed
a pair of pistols from his belt; the landlord having by this time set
a knife and fork for him, the three guests began to satisfy their
appetites in silence. The atmosphere of this room was hot and the flies
were so numerous that Prosper requested the landlord to open the window
looking toward the outer gate, so as to change the air. This window
was barricaded by an iron bar, the two ends of which were inserted into
holes made in the window casings. For greater security, two bolts were
screwed to each shutter. Prosper accidentally noticed the manner in
which the landlord managed these obstacles and opened the window.

As I am now speaking of localities, this is the place to describe to you
the interior arrangements of the inn; for, on an accurate knowledge of
the premises depends an understanding of my tale. The public room in
which the three persons I have named to you were sitting, had two outer
doors. One opened on the main road to Andernach, which skirts the Rhine.
In front of the inn was a little wharf, to which the boat hired by the
merchant for his journey was moored. The other door opened upon the
courtyard of the inn. This courtyard was surrounded by very high walls
and was full, for the time being, of cattle and horses, the stables
being occupied by human beings. The great gate leading into this
courtyard had been so carefully barricaded that to save time the
landlord had brought the merchant and sailors into the public room
through the door opening on the roadway. After having opened the window,
as requested by Prosper Magnan, he closed this door, slipped the iron
bars into their places and ran the bolts. The landlord's room, where
the two young surgeons were to sleep, adjoined the public room, and
was separated by a somewhat thin partition from the kitchen, where
the landlord and his wife intended, probably, to pass the night. The
servant-woman had left the premises to find a lodging in some crib or
hayloft. It is therefore easy to see that the kitchen, the landlord's
chamber, and the public room were, to some extent, isolated from
the rest of the house. In the courtyard were two large dogs, whose
deep-toned barking showed vigilant and easily roused guardians.

"What silence! and what a beautiful night!" said Wilhelm, looking at the
sky through the window, as the landlord was fastening the door.

The lapping of the river against the wharf was the only sound to be
heard.

"Messieurs," said the merchant, "permit me to offer you a few bottles
of wine to wash down the carp. We'll ease the fatigues of the day by
drinking. From your manner and the state of your clothes, I judge that
you have made, like me, a good bit of a journey to-day."

The two friends accepted, and the landlord went out by a door through
the kitchen to his cellar, situated, no doubt, under this portion of the
building. When five venerable bottles which he presently brought back
with him appeared on the table, the wife brought in the rest of the
supper. She gave to the dishes and to the room generally the glance of
a mistress, and then, sure of having attended to all the wants of the
travellers, she returned to the kitchen.

The four men, for the landlord was invited to drink, did not hear her go
to bed, but later, during the intervals of silence which came into their
talk, certain strongly accentuated snores, made the more sonorous by
the thin planks of the loft in which she had ensconced herself, made
the guests laugh and also the husband. Towards midnight, when nothing
remained on the table but biscuits, cheese, dried fruit, and good wine,
the guests, chiefly the young Frenchmen, became communicative. The
latter talked of their homes, their studies, and of the war. The
conversation grew lively. Prosper Magnan brought a few tears to the
merchant's eyes, when with the frankness and naivete of a good and
tender nature, he talked of what his mother must be doing at that hour,
while he was sitting drinking on the banks of the Rhine.

"I can see her," he said, "reading her prayers before she goes to bed.
She won't forget me; she is certain to say to herself, 'My poor
Prosper; I wonder where he is now!' If she has won a few sous from
her neighbors--your mother, perhaps," he added, nudging Wilhelm's
elbow--"she'll go and put them in the great red earthenware pot, where
she is accumulating a sum sufficient to buy the thirty acres adjoining
her little estate at Lescheville. Those thirty acres are worth at least
sixty thousand francs. Such fine fields! Ah! if I had them I'd live all
my days at Lescheville, without other ambition! How my father used to
long for those thirty acres and the pretty brook which winds through
the meadows! But he died without ever being able to buy them. Many's the
time I've played there!"

"Monsieur Wahlenfer, haven't you also your 'hoc erat in votis'?" asked
Wilhelm.

"Yes, monsieur, but it came to pass, and now--"

The good man was silent, and did not finish his sentence.

"As for me," said the landlord, whose face was rather flushed, "I bought
a field last spring, which I had been wanting for ten years."

They talked thus like men whose tongues are loosened by wine, and they
each took that friendly liking to the others of which we are never
stingy on a journey; so that when the time came to separate for the
night, Wilhelm offered his bed to the merchant.

"You can accept it without hesitation," he said, "for I can sleep with
Prosper. It won't be the first, nor the last time either. You are our
elder, and we ought to honor age!"

"Bah!" said the landlord, "my wife's bed has several mattresses; take
one off and put it on the floor."

So saying, he went and shut the window, making all the noise that
prudent operation demanded.

"I accept," said the merchant; "in fact I will admit," he added,
lowering his voice and looking at the two Frenchmen, "that I desired it.
My boatmen seem to me suspicious. I am not sorry to spend the night with
two brave young men, two French soldiers, for, between ourselves, I have
a hundred thousand francs in gold and diamonds in my valise."

The friendly caution with which this imprudent confidence was received
by the two young men, seemed to reassure the German. The landlord
assisted in taking off one of the mattresses, and when all was arranged
for the best he bade them good-night and went off to bed.

The merchant and the surgeons laughed over the nature of their pillows.
Prosper put his case of surgical instruments and that of Wilhelm under
the end of his mattress to raise it and supply the place of a bolster,
which was lacking. Wahlenfer, as a measure of precaution, put his valise
under his pillow.

"We shall both sleep on our fortune," said Prosper, "you, on your gold;
I, on my instruments. It remains to be seen whether my instruments will
ever bring me the gold you have now acquired."

"You may hope so," said the merchant. "Work and honesty can do
everything; have patience, however."

Wahlenfer and Wilhelm were soon asleep. Whether it was that his bed
on the floor was hard, or that his great fatigue was a cause of
sleeplessness, or that some fatal influence affected his soul, it is
certain that Prosper Magnan continued awake. His thoughts unconsciously
took an evil turn. His mind dwelt exclusively on the hundred thousand
francs which lay beneath the merchant's pillow. To Prosper Magnan one
hundred thousand francs was a vast and ready-made fortune. He began to
employ it in a hundred different ways; he made castles in the air, such
as we all make with eager delight during the moments preceding sleep, an
hour when images rise in our minds confusedly, and often, in the silence
of the night, thought acquires some magical power. He gratified his
mother's wishes; he bought the thirty acres of meadow land; he married
a young lady of Beauvais to whom his present want of fortune forbade
him to aspire. With a hundred thousand francs he planned a lifetime
of happiness; he saw himself prosperous, the father of a family, rich,
respected in his province, and, possibly, mayor of Beauvais. His brain
heated; he searched for means to turn his fictions to realities. He
began with extraordinary ardor to plan a crime theoretically. While
fancying the death of the merchant he saw distinctly the gold and
the diamonds. His eyes were dazzled by them. His heart throbbed.
Deliberation was, undoubtedly, already crime. Fascinated by that mass
of gold he intoxicated himself morally by murderous arguments. He asked
himself if that poor German had any need to live; he supposed the case
of his never having existed. In short, he planned the crime in a manner
to secure himself impunity. The other bank of the river was occupied by
the Austrian army; below the windows lay a boat and boatman; he would
cut the throat of that man, throw the body into the Rhine, and escape
with the valise; gold would buy the boatman and he could reach the
Austrians. He went so far as to calculate the professional ability he
had reached in the use of instruments, so as to cut through his victim's
throat without leaving him the chance for a single cry.

[Here Monsieur Taillefer wiped his forehead and drank a little water.]

Prosper rose slowly, making no noise. Certain of having waked no one,
he dressed himself and went into the public room. There, with that fatal
intelligence a man suddenly finds on some occasions within him, with
that power of tact and will which is never lacking to prisoners or
to criminals in whatever they undertake, he unscrewed the iron bars,
slipped them from their places without the slightest noise, placed them
against the wall, and opened the shutters, leaning heavily upon their
hinges to keep them from creaking. The moon was shedding its pale pure
light upon the scene, and he was thus enabled to faintly see into the
room where Wilhelm and Wahlenfer were sleeping. There, he told me, he
stood still for a moment. The throbbing of his heart was so strong, so
deep, so sonorous, that he was terrified; he feared he could not act
with coolness; his hands trembled; the soles of his feet seem planted
on red-hot coal; but the execution of his plan was accompanied by such
apparent good luck that he fancied he saw a species of predestination in
this favor bestowed upon him by fate. He opened the window, returned
to the bedroom, took his case of instruments, and selected the one most
suitable to accomplish the crime.

