took her paws and muzzle, pulled her ears, rolled her over on her back,
stroked her warm, delicate flanks. She let him do what ever he liked,
and when he began to stroke the hair on her feet she drew her claws in
carefully.

The man, keeping the dagger in one hand, thought to plunge it into the
belly of the too confiding panther, but he was afraid that he would be
immediately strangled in her last convulsive struggle; besides, he felt
in his heart a sort of remorse which bid him respect a creature that
had done him no harm. He seemed to have found a friend, in a boundless
desert; half unconsciously he thought of his first sweetheart, whom
he had nicknamed "Mignonne" by way of contrast, because she was so
atrociously jealous that all the time of their love he was in fear of
the knife with which she had always threatened him.

This memory of his early days suggested to him the idea of making the
young panther answer to this name, now that he began to admire with less
terror her swiftness, suppleness, and softness. Toward the end of the
day he had familiarized himself with his perilous position; he now
almost liked the painfulness of it. At last his companion had got into
the habit of looking up at him whenever he cried in a falsetto voice,
"Mignonne."

At the setting of the sun Mignonne gave, several times running,
a profound melancholy cry. "She's been well brought up," said the
lighthearted soldier; "she says her prayers." But this mental joke only
occurred to him when he noticed what a pacific attitude his companion
remained in. "Come, ma petite blonde, I'll let you go to bed first,"
he said to her, counting on the activity of his own legs to run away as
quickly as possible, directly she was asleep, and seek another shelter
for the night.

The soldier waited with impatience the hour of his flight, and when
it had arrived he walked vigorously in the direction of the Nile; but
hardly had he made a quarter of a league in the sand when he heard the
panther bounding after him, crying with that saw-like cry more dreadful
even than the sound of her leaping.

"Ah!" he said, "then she's taken a fancy to me, she has never met anyone
before, and it is really quite flattering to have her first love." That
instant the man fell into one of those movable quicksands so terrible
to travelers and from which it is impossible to save oneself. Feeling
himself caught, he gave a shriek of alarm; the panther seized him with
her teeth by the collar, and, springing vigorously backwards, drew him
as if by magic out of the whirling sand.

"Ah, Mignonne!" cried the soldier, caressing her enthusiastically;
"we're bound together for life and death but no jokes, mind!" and he
retraced his steps.

From that time the desert seemed inhabited. It contained a being to
whom the man could talk, and whose ferocity was rendered gentle by him,
though he could not explain to himself the reason for their strange
friendship. Great as was the soldier's desire to stay upon guard, he
slept.

On awakening he could not find Mignonne; he mounted the hill, and in the
distance saw her springing toward him after the habit of these animals,
who cannot run on account of the extreme flexibility of the vertebral
column. Mignonne arrived, her jaws covered with blood; she received the
wonted caress of her companion, showing with much purring how happy it
made her. Her eyes, full of languor, turned still more gently than the
day before toward the Provencal, who talked to her as one would to a
tame animal.

"Ah! mademoiselle, you are a nice girl, aren't you? Just look at that!
So we like to be made much of, don't we? Aren't you ashamed of yourself?
So you have been eating some Arab or other, have you? That doesn't
matter. They're animals just the same as you are; but don't you take to
eating Frenchmen, or I shan't like you any longer."

She played like a dog with its master, letting herself be rolled over,
knocked about, and stroked, alternately; sometimes she herself would
provoke the soldier, putting up her paw with a soliciting gesture.

Some days passed in this manner. This companionship permitted the
Provencal to appreciate the sublime beauty of the desert; now that he
had a living thing to think about, alternations of fear and quiet, and
plenty to eat, his mind became filled with contrast and his life began
to be diversified.

Solitude revealed to him all her secrets, and enveloped him in her
delights. He discovered in the rising and setting of the sun sights
unknown to the world. He knew what it was to tremble when he heard over
his head the hiss of a bird's wing, so rarely did they pass, or when
he saw the clouds, changing and many colored travelers, melt one into
another. He studied in the night time the effect of the moon upon the
ocean of sand, where the simoom made waves swift of movement and rapid
in their change. He lived the life of the Eastern day, marveling at its
wonderful pomp; then, after having reveled in the sight of a hurricane
over the plain where the whirling sands made red, dry mists and
death-bearing clouds, he would welcome the night with joy, for then fell
the healthful freshness of the stars, and he listened to imaginary
music in the skies. Then solitude taught him to unroll the treasures
of dreams. He passed whole hours in remembering mere nothings, and
comparing his present life with his past.

At last he grew passionately fond of the panther; for some sort of
affection was a necessity.

Whether it was that his will powerfully projected had modified the
character of his companion, or whether, because she found abundant food
in her predatory excursions in the desert, she respected the man's life,
he began to fear for it no longer, seeing her so well tamed.

He devoted the greater part of his time to sleep, but he was obliged to
watch like a spider in its web that the moment of his deliverance might
not escape him, if anyone should pass the line marked by the horizon. He
had sacrificed his shirt to make a flag with, which he hung at the top
of a palm tree, whose foliage he had torn off. Taught by necessity, he
found the means of keeping it spread out, by fastening it with little
sticks; for the wind might not be blowing at the moment when the passing
traveler was looking through the desert.

It was during the long hours, when he had abandoned hope, that he amused
himself with the panther. He had come to learn the different inflections
of her voice, the expressions of her eyes; he had studied the capricious
patterns of all the rosettes which marked the gold of her robe. Mignonne
was not even angry when he took hold of the tuft at the end of her tail
to count her rings, those graceful ornaments which glittered in the
sun like jewelry. It gave him pleasure to contemplate the supple, fine
outlines of her form, the whiteness of her belly, the graceful pose of
her head. But it was especially when she was playing that he felt most
pleasure in looking at her; the agility and youthful lightness of her
movements were a continual surprise to him; he wondered at the supple
way in which she jumped and climbed, washed herself and arranged her
fur, crouched down and prepared to spring. However rapid her spring
might be, however slippery the stone she was on, she would always stop
short at the word "Mignonne."

One day, in a bright midday sun, an enormous bird coursed through
the air. The man left his panther to look at his new guest; but after
waiting a moment the deserted sultana growled deeply.

"My goodness! I do believe she's jealous," he cried, seeing her eyes
become hard again; "the soul of Virginie has passed into her body;
that's certain."

The eagle disappeared into the air, while the soldier admired the curved
contour of the panther.

But there was such youth and grace in her form! she was beautiful as a
woman! the blond fur of her robe mingled well with the delicate tints of
faint white which marked her flanks.

The profuse light cast down by the sun made this living gold,
these russet markings, to burn in a way to give them an indefinable
attraction.

The man and the panther looked at one another with a look full of
meaning; the coquette quivered when she felt her friend stroke her head;
her eyes flashed like lightning--then she shut them tightly.

"She has a soul," he said, looking at the stillness of this queen of
the sands, golden like them, white like them, solitary and burning like
them.



"Well," she said, "I have read your plea in favor of beasts; but how did
two so well adapted to understand each other end?"

"Ah, well! you see, they ended as all great passions do end--by a
misunderstanding. For some reason ONE suspects the other of treason;
they don't come to an explanation through pride, and quarrel and part
from sheer obstinacy."

"Yet sometimes at the best moments a single word or a look is
enough--but anyhow go on with your story."

"It's horribly difficult, but you will understand, after what the old
villain told me over his champagne. He said--'I don't know if I hurt
her, but she turned round, as if enraged, and with her sharp teeth
caught hold of my leg--gently, I daresay; but I, thinking she would
devour me, plunged my dagger into her throat. She rolled over, giving
a cry that froze my heart; and I saw her dying, still looking at me
without anger. I would have given all the world--my cross even, which I
had not got then--to have brought her to life again. It was as though I
had murdered a real person; and the soldiers who had seen my flag, and
were come to my assistance, found me in tears.'

"'Well sir,' he said, after a moment of silence, 'since then I have
been in war in Germany, in Spain, in Russia, in France; I've certainly
carried my carcase about a good deal, but never have I seen anything
like the desert. Ah! yes, it is very beautiful!'

"'What did you feel there?' I asked him.

"'Oh! that can't be described, young man! Besides, I am not always
regretting my palm trees and my panther. I should have to be very
melancholy for that. In the desert, you see, there is everything and
nothing.'

"'Yes, but explain----'

"'Well,' he said, with an impatient gesture, 'it is God without
mankind.'"



