in that hovel of commentators, that garret of gossip, called the
Law-school. I have never so much as opened the Code; but I see its
application on the vitals of society. The Code, my dear Paul, makes
woman a ward; it considers her a child, a minor. Now how must we govern
children? By fear. In that one word, Paul, is the curb of the
beast. Now, feel your own pulse! Have you the strength to play the
tyrant,--you, so gentle, so kind a friend, so confiding; you, at whom
I have laughed, but whom I love, and love enough to reveal to you my
science? For this is science. Yes, it proceeds from a science which
the Germans are already calling Anthropology. Ah! if I had not already
solved the mystery of life by pleasure, if I had not a profound
antipathy for those who think instead of act, if I did not despise the
ninnies who are silly enough to believe in the truth of a book, when
the sands of the African deserts are made of the ashes of I know not
how many unknown and pulverized Londons, Romes, Venices, and Parises, I
would write a book on modern marriages made under the influence of the
Christian system, and I'd stick a lantern on that heap of sharp stones
among which lie the votaries of the social 'multiplicamini.' But the
question is, Does humanity require even an hour of my time? And besides,
isn't the more reasonable use of ink that of snaring hearts by writing
love-letters?--Well, shall you bring the Comtesse de Manerville here,
and let us see her?"

"Perhaps," said Paul.

"We shall still be friends," said de Marsay.

"If--" replied Paul.

"Don't be uneasy; we will treat you politely, as Maison-Rouge treated
the English at Fontenoy."




CHAPTER II. THE PINK OF FASHION


Though the foregoing conversation affected the Comte de Manerville
somewhat, he made it a point of duty to carry out his intentions, and he
returned to Bordeaux during the winter of the year 1821.

The expenses he incurred in restoring and furnishing his family mansion
sustained the reputation for elegance which had preceded him. Introduced
through his former connections to the royalist society of Bordeaux, to
which he belonged as much by his personal opinions as by his name and
fortune, he soon obtained a fashionable pre-eminence. His knowledge
of life, his manners, his Parisian acquirements enchanted the Faubourg
Saint-Germain of Bordeaux. An old marquise made use of a term formerly
in vogue at court to express the flowery beauty of the fops and beaux of
the olden time, whose language and demeanor were social laws: she called
him "the pink of fashion." The liberal clique caught up the word and
used it satirically as a nickname, while the royalist party continued to
employ it in good faith.

Paul de Manerville acquitted himself gloriously of the obligations
imposed by his flowery title. It happened to him, as to many a mediocre
actor, that the day when the public granted him their full attention he
became, one may almost say, superior. Feeling at his ease, he displayed
the fine qualities which accompanied his defects. His wit had
nothing sharp or bitter in it; his manners were not supercilious; his
intercourse with women expressed the respect they like,--it was neither
too deferential, nor too familiar; his foppery went no farther than a
care for his personal appearance which made him agreeable; he showed
consideration for rank; he allowed young men a certain freedom, to which
his Parisian experience assigned due limits; though skilful with sword
and pistol, he was noted for a feminine gentleness for which others were
grateful. His medium height and plumpness (which had not yet increased
into obesity, an obstacle to personal elegance) did not prevent his
outer man from playing the part of a Bordelais Brummell. A white skin
tinged with the hues of health, handsome hands and feet, blue eyes with
long lashes, black hair, graceful motions, a chest voice which kept to
its middle tones and vibrated in the listener's heart, harmonized well
with his sobriquet. Paul was indeed that delicate flower which needs
such careful culture, the qualities of which display themselves only in
a moist and suitable soil,--a flower which rough treatment dwarfs, which
the hot sun burns, and a frost lays low. He was one of those men made
to receive happiness, rather than to give it; who have something of the
woman in their nature, wishing to be divined, understood, encouraged; in
short, a man to whom conjugal love ought to come as a providence.

If such a character creates difficulties in private life, it is gracious
and full of attraction for the world. Consequently, Paul had great
success in the narrow social circle of the provinces, where his mind,
always, so to speak, in half-tints, was better appreciated than in
Paris.

The arrangement of his house and the restoration of the chateau de
Lanstrac, where he introduced the comfort and luxury of an English
country-house, absorbed the capital saved by the notary during the
preceding six years. Reduced now to his strict income of forty-odd
thousand a year, he thought himself wise and prudent in so regulating
his household as not to exceed it.

After publicly exhibiting his equipages, entertaining the most
distinguished young men of the place, and giving various hunting parties
on the estate at Lanstrac, Paul saw very plainly that provincial life
would never do without marriage. Too young to employ his time in
miserly occupations, or in trying to interest himself in the speculative
improvements in which provincials sooner or later engage (compelled
thereto by the necessity of establishing their children), he soon felt
the need of that variety of distractions a habit of which becomes
at last the very life of a Parisian. A name to preserve, property to
transmit to heirs, social relations to be created by a household
where the principal families of the neighborhood could assemble, and
a weariness of all irregular connections, were not, however, the
determining reasons of his matrimonial desires. From the time he first
returned to the provinces he had been secretly in love with the queen of
Bordeaux, the great beauty, Mademoiselle Evangelista.

About the beginning of the century, a rich Spaniard, named Evangelista,
established himself in Bordeaux, where his letters of recommendation,
as well as his large fortune, gave him an entrance to the salons of
the nobility. His wife contributed greatly to maintain him in the good
graces of an aristocracy which may perhaps have adopted him in the first
instance merely to pique the society of the class below them. Madame
Evangelista, who belonged to the Casa-Reale, an illustrious family of
Spain, was a Creole, and, like all women served by slaves, she lived as
a great lady, knew nothing of the value of money, repressed no whims,
even the most expensive, finding them ever satisfied by an adoring
husband who generously concealed from her knowledge the running-gear of
the financial machine. Happy in finding her pleased with Bordeaux, where
his interests obliged him to live, the Spaniard bought a house, set up a
household, received in much style, and gave many proofs of possessing a
fine taste in all things. Thus, from 1800 to 1812, Monsieur and Madame
Evangelista were objects of great interest to the community of Bordeaux.

The Spaniard died in 1813, leaving his wife a widow at thirty-two years
of age, with an immense fortune and the prettiest little girl in the
world, a child of eleven, who promised to be, and did actually become,
a most accomplished young woman. Clever as Madame Evangelista was, the
Restoration altered her position; the royalist party cleared its ranks
and several of the old families left Bordeaux. Though the head and hand
of her husband were lacking in the direction of her affairs, for which
she had hitherto shown the indifference of a Creole and the inaptitude
of a lackadaisical woman, she was determined to make no change in her
manner of living. At the period when Paul resolved to return to his
native town, Mademoiselle Natalie Evangelista was a remarkably beautiful
young girl, and, apparently, the richest match in Bordeaux, where the
steady diminution of her mother's capital was unknown. In order to
prolong her reign, Madame Evangelista had squandered enormous sums.
Brilliant fetes and the continuation of an almost regal style of living
kept the public in its past belief as to the wealth of the Spanish
family.

Natalie was now in her nineteenth year, but no proposal of marriage
had as yet reached her mother's ear. Accustomed to gratify her fancies,
Mademoiselle Evangelista wore cashmeres and jewels, and lived in a style
of luxury which alarmed all speculative suitors in a region and at a
period when sons were as calculating as their parents. The fatal remark,
"None but a prince can afford to marry Mademoiselle Evangelista,"
circulated among the salons and the cliques. Mothers of families,
dowagers who had granddaughters to establish, young girls jealous of
Natalie, whose elegance and tyrannical beauty annoyed them, took pains
to envenom this opinion with treacherous remarks. When they heard a
possible suitor say with ecstatic admiration, as Natalie entered a
ball-room, "Heavens, how beautiful she is!" "Yes," the mammas would
answer, "but expensive." If some new-comer thought Mademoiselle
Evangelista bewitching and said to a marriageable man that he couldn't
do it better, "Who would be bold enough," some woman would reply, "to
marry a girl whose mother gives her a thousand francs a month for her
toilet,--a girl who has horses and a maid of her own, and wears laces?
Yes, her 'peignoirs' are trimmed with mechlin. The price of her washing
would support the household of a clerk. She wears pelerines in the
morning which actually cost six francs to get up."

These, and other speeches said occasionally in the form of praise
extinguished the desires that some men might have had to marry the
beautiful Spanish girl. Queen of every ball, accustomed to flattery,
"blasee" with the smiles and the admiration which followed her every
step, Natalie, nevertheless, knew nothing of life. She lived as the
bird which flies, as the flower that blooms, finding every one about her
eager to do her will. She was ignorant of the price of things; she
knew neither the value of money, nor whence it came, how it should be
managed, and how spent. Possibly she thought that every household had
cooks and coachmen, lady's-maids and footmen, as the fields have hay and
the trees their fruits. To her, beggars and paupers, fallen trees and
waste lands seemed in the same category. Pampered and petted as her
mother's hope, no fatigue was allowed to spoil her pleasure. Thus she
bounded through life as a courser on his steppe, unbridled and unshod.

Six month's after Paul's arrival the Pink of Fashion and the Queen of
Balls met in presence of the highest society of the town of Bordeaux.
The two flowers looked at each other with apparent coldness, and
mutually thought each other charming. Interested in watching the effects
of the meeting, Madame Evangelista divined in the expression of Paul's
eyes the feelings within him, and she muttered to herself, "He will be
my son-in-law." Paul, on the other hand, said to himself, as he looked
at Natalie, "She will be my wife."

The wealth of the Evangelistas, proverbial in Bordeaux, had remained in
Paul's mind as a memory of his childhood. Thus the pecuniary conditions
were known to him from the start, without necessitating those
discussions and inquiries which are as repugnant to a timid mind as to a
proud one. When some persons attempting to say to Paul a few flattering
phrases as to Natalie's manner, language, and beauty, ending by remarks,
cruelly calculated to deter him, on the lavish extravagance of the
Evangelistas, the Pink of Fashion replied with a disdain that was
well-deserved by such provincial pettiness. This method of receiving
such speeches soon silenced them; for he now set the tone to the ideas
