over to the professor and fetched me home again. A young girl would have
been treated with less precaution than my mother's fears insisted on for
me. Paris alarmed my parents, and justly. Students are secretly engaged
in the same occupation which fills the minds of young ladies in their
boarding-schools. Do what you will, nothing can prevent the latter from
talking of lovers, or the former of women. But in Paris, and especially
at this particular time, such talk among young lads was influenced by
the oriental and sultanic atmosphere and customs of the Palais-Royal.

The Palais-Royal was an Eldorado of love where the ingots melted away in
coin; there virgin doubts were over; there curiosity was appeased. The
Palais-Royal and I were two asymptotes bearing one towards the other,
yet unable to meet. Fate miscarried all my attempts. My father had
presented me to one of my aunts who lived in the Ile St. Louis. With her
I was to dine on Sundays and Thursdays, escorted to the house by either
Monsieur or Madame Lepitre, who went out themselves on those days and
were to call for me on their way home. Singular amusement for a
young lad! My aunt, the Marquise de Listomere, was a great lady, of
ceremonious habits, who would never have dreamed of offering me money.
Old as a cathedral, painted like a miniature, sumptuous in dress, she
lived in her great house as though Louis XV. were not dead, and saw none
but old women and men of a past day,--a fossil society which made me
think I was in a graveyard. No one spoke to me and I had not the courage
to speak first. Cold and alien looks made me ashamed of my youth,
which seemed to annoy them. I counted on this indifference to aid me in
certain plans; I was resolved to escape some day directly after dinner
and rush to the Palais-Royal. Once seated at whist my aunt would pay no
attention to me. Jean, the footman, cared little for Monsieur Lepitre
and would have aided me; but on the day I chose for my adventure that
luckless dinner was longer than usual,--either because the jaws employed
were worn out or the false teeth more imperfect. At last, between eight
and nine o'clock, I reached the staircase, my heart beating like that of
Bianca Capello on the day of her flight; but when the porter pulled the
cord I beheld in the street before me Monsieur Lepitre's hackney-coach,
and I heard his pursy voice demanding me!

Three times did fate interpose between the hell of the Palais-Royal and
the heaven of my youth. On the day when I, ashamed at twenty years of
age of my own ignorance, determined to risk all dangers to put an end
to it, at the very moment when I was about to run away from Monsieur
Lepitre as he got into the coach,--a difficult process, for he was
as fat as Louis XVIII. and club-footed,--well, can you believe it, my
mother arrived in a post-chaise! Her glance arrested me; I stood
still, like a bird before a snake. What fate had brought her there? The
simplest thing in the world. Napoleon was then making his last efforts.
My father, who foresaw the return of the Bourbons, had come to Paris
with my mother to advise my brother, who was employed in the imperial
diplomatic service. My mother was to take me back with her, out of the
way of dangers which seemed, to those who followed the march of events
intelligently, to threaten the capital. In a few minutes, as it were, I
was taken out of Paris, at the very moment when my life there was about
to become fatal to me.

The tortures of imagination excited by repressed desires, the weariness
of a life depressed by constant privations had driven me to study, just
as men, weary of fate, confine themselves in a cloister. To me,
study had become a passion, which might even be fatal to my health by
imprisoning me at a period of life when young men ought to yield to the
bewitching activities of their springtide youth.

This slight sketch of my boyhood, in which you, Natalie, can readily
perceive innumerable songs of woe, was needful to explain to you its
influence on my future life. At twenty years of age, and affected by
many morbid elements, I was still small and thin and pale. My soul,
filled with the will to do, struggled with a body that seemed weakly,
but which, in the words of an old physician at Tours, was undergoing its
final fusion into a temperament of iron. Child in body and old in mind,
I had read and thought so much that I knew life metaphysically at its
highest reaches at the moment when I was about to enter the tortuous
difficulties of its defiles and the sandy roads of its plains. A strange
chance had held me long in that delightful period when the soul awakes
to its first tumults, to its desires for joy, and the savor of life
is fresh. I stood in the period between puberty and manhood,--the one
prolonged by my excessive study, the other tardily developing its living
shoots. No young man was ever more thoroughly prepared to feel and to
love. To understand my history, let your mind dwell on that pure time
of youth when the mouth is innocent of falsehood; when the glance of
the eye is honest, though veiled by lids which droop from timidity
contradicting desire; when the soul bends not to worldly Jesuitism,
and the heart throbs as violently from trepidation as from the generous
impulses of young emotion.

I need say nothing of the journey I made with my mother from Paris to
Tours. The coldness of her behavior repressed me. At each relay I tried
to speak; but a look, a word from her frightened away the speeches I had
been meditating. At Orleans, where we had passed the night, my mother
complained of my silence. I threw myself at her feet and clasped her
knees; with tears I opened my heart. I tried to touch hers by the
eloquence of my hungry love in accents that might have moved a
stepmother. She replied that I was playing comedy. I complained that she
had abandoned me. She called me an unnatural child. My whole nature was
so wrung that at Blois I went upon the bridge to drown myself in the
Loire. The height of the parapet prevented my suicide.

When I reached home, my two sisters, who did not know me, showed
more surprise than tenderness. Afterwards, however, they seemed, by
comparison, to be full of kindness towards me. I was given a room on the
third story. You will understand the extent of my hardships when I tell
you that my mother left me, a young man of twenty, without other linen
than my miserable school outfit, or any other outside clothes than those
I had long worn in Paris. If I ran from one end of the room to the other
to pick up her handkerchief, she took it with the cold thanks a lady
gives to her footman. Driven to watch her to find if there were any soft
spot where I could fasten the rootlets of affection, I came to see
her as she was,--a tall, spare woman, given to cards, egotistical and
insolent, like all the Listomeres, who count insolence as part of their
dowry. She saw nothing in life except duties to be fulfilled. All
cold women whom I have known made, as she did, a religion of duty; she
received our homage as a priest receives the incense of the mass. My
elder brother appeared to absorb the trifling sentiment of maternity
which was in her nature. She stabbed us constantly with her sharp
irony,--the weapon of those who have no heart,--and which she used
against us, who could make her no reply.

Notwithstanding these thorny hindrances, the instinctive sentiments
have so many roots, the religious fear inspired by a mother whom it
is dangerous to displease holds by so many threads, that the sublime
mistake--if I may so call it--of our love for our mother lasted until
the day, much later in our lives, when we judged her finally. This
terrible despotism drove from my mind all thoughts of the voluptuous
enjoyments I had dreamed of finding at Tours. In despair I took refuge
in my father's library, where I set myself to read every book I did not
know. These long periods of hard study saved me from contact with my
mother; but they aggravated the dangers of my moral condition. Sometimes
my eldest sister--she who afterwards married our cousin, the Marquis de
Listomere--tried to comfort me, without, however, being able to calm the
irritation to which I was a victim. I desired to die.

Great events, of which I knew nothing, were then in preparation. The Duc
d'Angouleme, who had left Bordeaux to join Louis XVIII. in Paris, was
received in every town through which he passed with ovations inspired by
the enthusiasm felt throughout old France at the return of the Bourbons.
Touraine was aroused for its legitimate princes; the town itself was
in a flutter, every window decorated, the inhabitants in their Sunday
clothes, a festival in preparation, and that nameless excitement in the
air which intoxicates, and which gave me a strong desire to be present
at the ball given by the duke. When I summoned courage to make this
request of my mother, who was too ill to go herself, she became
extremely angry. "Had I come from Congo?" she inquired. "How could I
suppose that our family would not be represented at the ball? In
the absence of my father and brother, of course it was my duty to be
present. Had I no mother? Was she not always thinking of the welfare of
her children?"

In a moment the semi-disinherited son had become a personage! I was more
dumfounded by my importance than by the deluge of ironical reasoning
with which my mother received my request. I questioned my sisters, and
then discovered that my mother, who liked such theatrical plots,
was already attending to my clothes. The tailors in Tours were fully
occupied by the sudden demands of their regular customers, and my mother
was forced to employ her usual seamstress, who--according to provincial
custom--could do all kinds of sewing. A bottle-blue coat had been
secretly made for me, after a fashion, and silk stockings and pumps
provided; waistcoats were then worn short, so that I could wear one
of my father's; and for the first time in my life I had a shirt with a
frill, the pleatings of which puffed out my chest and were gathered
in to the knot of my cravat. When dressed in this apparel I looked so
little like myself that my sister's compliments nerved me to face
all Touraine at the ball. But it was a bold enterprise. Thanks to my
slimness I slipped into a tent set up in the gardens of the Papion
house, and found a place close to the armchair in which the duke was
seated. Instantly I was suffocated by the heat, and dazzled by the
lights, the scarlet draperies, the gilded ornaments, the dresses, and
the diamonds of the first public ball I had ever witnessed. I was pushed
hither and thither by a mass of men and women, who hustled each other in
a cloud of dust. The brazen clash of military music was drowned in the
hurrahs and acclamations of "Long live the Duc d'Angouleme! Long live
the King! Long live the Bourbons!" The ball was an outburst of pent-up
enthusiasm, where each man endeavored to outdo the rest in his fierce
haste to worship the rising sun,--an exhibition of partisan greed which
left me unmoved, or rather, it disgusted me and drove me back within
myself.

Swept onward like a straw in the whirlwind, I was seized with a childish
desire to be the Duc d'Angouleme himself, to be one of these princes
parading before an awed assemblage. This silly fancy of a Tourangean lad
roused an ambition to which my nature and the surrounding circumstances
lent dignity. Who would not envy such worship?--a magnificent repetition
of which I saw a few months later, when all Paris rushed to the feet
of the Emperor on his return from Elba. The sense of this dominion
exercised over the masses, whose feelings and whose very life are thus
merged into one soul, dedicated me then and thenceforth to glory, that
priestess who slaughters the Frenchmen of to-day as the Druidess once
sacrificed the Gauls.

Suddenly I met the woman who was destined to spur these ambitious
desires and to crown them by sending me into the heart of royalty.
Too timid to ask any one to dance,--fearing, moreover, to confuse the
figures,--I naturally became very awkward, and did not know what to
do with my arms and legs. Just as I was suffering severely from the
pressure of the crowd an officer stepped on my feet, swollen by the new
leather of my shoes as well as by the heat. This disgusted me with the
whole affair. It was impossible to get away; but I took refuge in a
corner of a room at the end of an empty bench, where I sat with
fixed eyes, motionless and sullen. Misled by my puny appearance, a
woman--taking me for a sleepy child--slid softly into the place beside
me, with the motion of a bird as she drops upon her nest. Instantly I
breathed the woman-atmosphere, which irradiated my soul as, in after
days, oriental poesy has shone there. I looked at my neighbor, and was
more dazzled by that vision than I had been by the scene of the fete.
